PSP: 000008
Title: SRBN Agent SDK, Coding Domain Package, and Mutable Work Graph
Author: Vikrant Rathore (@vikrantrathore)
Status: Draft
Type: Enhancement
Created: 2026-06-20
Discussion-To: TBD
Extends: 000005, 000007

========
Abstract
========

This PSP defines the next implementation phase for Perspt's SRBN agent as an
SDK-first platform. Perspt SHALL build a reusable SRBN agent SDK around
residual-directed verification, read-only exploration, domain-provided verifier
suites, a mutable parallel work graph, deterministic capability/admissibility,
replay, and observability. The coding agent becomes the first domain package
built on that SDK rather than the place where the control plane is hardcoded.
The same SDK should support later research, website-builder, and task-specific
agents without duplicating SRBN scheduling, residual, capability, ledger, or
dashboard machinery.

==========
Motivation
==========

Perspt already implements major parts of :psp:`000005` and :psp:`000007`:
project-first execution, plugin-driven verification, typed artifact bundles,
correction-attempt telemetry, budget checks, V_boot activation, plan validation,
and graph rewrite primitives. That progress is necessary, but it is not yet
sufficient for reliable long-running coding and task agents.

The reviewed SRBN material points to the missing layer:

* Paper I states the single-agent stability contract: define a proxy state,
  measure verifier residuals, aggregate them into a Lyapunov energy, correct
  dominant residuals through an independent barrier, and commit only accepted
  states to immutable history.
* Paper II turns that into a harness contract: every candidate is observed, only
  hard-pass or energy-descending candidates enter the accepted trajectory, and
  correction exhaustion must terminate with a residual certificate rather than a
  success claim.
* Paper III lifts the harness to a platform: stochastic actors emit proposals,
  deterministic capabilities mediate effects, authority can only attenuate,
  risk budgets are recorded and calibrated, recovery classification is total,
  replay is deterministic, and only non-commuting durable commits require
  serialization.
* The Rust ``srbn`` crate expresses the executable kernel in minimal form:
  ``run`` and ``stabilize`` loops, finite non-negative residual scores,
  ``BarrierResult`` evidence and correction fields, descent-gated stopping,
  attempt traces, and explicit terminal statuses.

The current Perspt implementation has the right vocabulary, but several gaps
remain:

* ``SRBNOrchestrator::run_orchestration`` and ``run_resumed_inner`` still take a
  topological snapshot and walk it once. Graph rewrite methods can split nodes,
  insert interface nodes, or reset subgraphs, but the active scheduler may not
  revisit reset nodes or execute newly inserted nodes.
* ``apply_repair_action`` often marks a node as ``Retry`` or mutates graph
  topology, while ``execute_node`` immediately returns ``NodeOutcome::Escalated``.
  The repair action does not become a durable scheduler command.
* Verification is still mostly stage-result based. It lacks a first-class
  residual taxonomy that can explain why a compiler, LSP, AST query, test,
  formatter, coreutils command, or logical validator failed and what correction
  direction it recommends.
* Language plugins select verifier commands, but they do not yet own a complete
  verifier suite: parser/AST extraction, symbol inventory, dependency graph,
  import graph, build target selection, test attribution, tree-search repair
  candidates, and structured correction directions.
* The plugin-first architecture is too narrow as the primary extension model.
  A language plugin is a good place for Rust, Python, or TypeScript-specific
  sensors, but it is the wrong place for domain-neutral SRBN machinery such as
  scheduling, replay, capabilities, residual scoring, dashboard projections,
  exploration budgets, and model routing. Those mechanisms should be SDK
  contracts used by coding, research, website-building, and task-specific
  packages.
* Existing-codebase exploration is not first-class. The agent needs a cheap,
  read-only way to map unfamiliar repositories before planning or mutation
  without spending architect-tier tokens on every file and symbol question.
* Agent phases are mostly serialized even when they are independent. Repository
  scans, symbol extraction, verifier runs, and unrelated node work should be
  parallelizable, while dependent work must wait on explicit edges, locks,
  state witnesses, or residual seals.
* Command and file effects are policy-checked, but the platform model is not yet
  explicit. The agent can still route broad shell strings through ``sh -c`` after
  sanitization. That is not the same thing as capability-constrained proposals
  whose effects, scope, risk, and approval state are ledgered.
* The prompt compiler exists, but some prompt families still render through
  legacy static template strings. The compiler should become the single typed
  interface from residual evidence to correction prompts.
* The ledger stores many useful records, including ``srbn_step_records`` and
  ``correction_attempts``, but it is not yet an event-sourced replay contract
  for every proposal, rejection, approval, effect, verifier observation, graph
  revision, and rollback.

The product requirement is reusable reliability. A coding agent needs repository
exploration, fast search and read tools, precise edits, plan/build/review
workflows, tests, language-server feedback, permission gates, resumability, and
clear status. A research agent needs source gathering, citation validation,
claim residuals, and evidence provenance. A website-builder agent needs asset,
accessibility, build, responsive-layout, and deployment verifiers. These should
not be three separate orchestration systems. Perspt should provide one SRBN SDK
and multiple domain packages.

================
Proposed Changes
================

.. rubric:: Functional Specification

Perspt SHALL implement an SDK-first SRBN agent platform composed of nine
load-bearing systems:

1. a domain-neutral SRBN agent SDK,
2. a coding domain package built on that SDK,
3. an SRBN kernel adapter for state stabilization,
4. a read-only exploration and model-routing layer,
5. a mutable parallel work graph scheduler,
6. SDK verifier/sensor suites with coding language adapters,
7. a residual evidence and correction-direction model,
8. a capability-constrained admissibility kernel,
9. a replayable ledger and observability surface that exposes graph, residual,
   capability, worker, verifier, and replay state.

.. graphviz::
   :caption: SRBN Coding-Agent Control Loop
   :align: center

   digraph psp8_control_loop {
     rankdir=LR;
     bgcolor="transparent";
     splines=ortho;
     node [shape=box, style="rounded,filled", fontname="Arial", fontsize=10, margin="0.18,0.10"];
     edge [fontname="Arial", fontsize=9, color="#546E7A", fontcolor="#455A64"];

     task [label="User task\nsession charter", fillcolor="#E3F2FD", color="#1E88E5"];
     explore [label="Explorer\nread-only evidence", fillcolor="#E8F5E9", color="#43A047"];
     profile [label="Project profile\ncontext witnesses", fillcolor="#F1F8E9", color="#689F38"];
     workgraph [label="Mutable WorkGraph\nrevision N", fillcolor="#FFF3E0", color="#FB8C00"];
     implement [label="Implementer\ncandidate patch", fillcolor="#E1F5FE", color="#039BE5"];
     admissible [label="Admissibility kernel\ncapabilities + leases", fillcolor="#F3E5F5", color="#8E24AA"];
     verify [label="Verifier suites\ncompiler + LSP + tests", fillcolor="#FCE4EC", color="#D81B60"];
     residuals [label="Residual vector\nenergy + directions", fillcolor="#FFEBEE", color="#E53935"];
     srbn [label="SRBN kernel\nhard pass or descent", fillcolor="#ECEFF1", color="#607D8B"];
     accept [label="Accepted state\ncommit boundary", fillcolor="#DCEDC8", color="#558B2F"];
     revise [label="Repair or graph revision\nnew node generation", fillcolor="#FFF8E1", color="#F9A825"];
     cert [label="Residual certificate\nhonest stop", fillcolor="#FBE9E7", color="#D84315"];
     ledger [label="Replay ledger\nMerkle history", fillcolor="#E0F2F1", color="#00897B"];
     dashboard [label="Web dashboard\nlive observability", fillcolor="#EDE7F6", color="#5E35B1"];

     task -> explore;
     explore -> profile;
     profile -> workgraph;
     workgraph -> implement;
     implement -> admissible;
     admissible -> verify [label="allowed effect"];
     admissible -> residuals [label="denied effect"];
     verify -> residuals;
     residuals -> srbn;
     srbn -> accept [label="stable / descent"];
     srbn -> revise [label="correct / replan"];
     srbn -> cert [label="exhausted"];
     revise -> workgraph [label="revision N+1"];
     accept -> ledger;
     cert -> ledger;
     workgraph -> ledger [label="revision event"];
     ledger -> dashboard;
   }

The systems below are normative for this PSP.

1. SDK-First Architecture
=========================

This PSP SHALL use an SDK-first design. The SDK owns the domain-neutral control
plane; domain packages provide task-specific semantics.

The review conclusion is:

* plugin-first is useful for language-specific sensors but too narrow for the
  overall architecture;
* SDK-first is the better boundary because SRBN stabilization, mutable graph
  scheduling, residual evidence, capability confinement, replay, model routing,
  and dashboard projections are reusable across domains;
* coding should become the first production domain package built with the SDK;
* language plugins should become coding-domain adapters that implement SDK
  verifier and correction contracts;
* research, website-builder, and task-specific packages should use the same SDK
  instead of forking the coding agent.

Perspt SHALL add a public ``perspt-sdk`` crate. The SDK SHALL expose stable
interfaces for:

* SRBN state adapters and barrier results;
* integration with the published ``srbn`` and ``srbn-serde`` crates for
  stabilization loops, barrier outcomes, attempt traces, and trace
  serialization;
* work graph nodes, edges, revisions, leases, and scheduler effects;
* agent roles, activities, and model routes;
* domain exploration reports and context packages;
* verifier/sensor suites and residual events;
* correction-direction contracts;
* effect proposals, capabilities, command IR, and admissibility decisions;
* event-ledger records, replay observations, and dashboard projections;
* benchmark harnesses and mechanism checks.

The SDK SHALL NOT hardcode coding-specific concepts such as ``Cargo.toml``,
``pytest``, TypeScript exports, AST import graphs, package-lock policies, or
source-edit bundles beyond generic artifact operations. Those belong to the
coding package.

Perspt SHALL add a first-party coding domain package, named
``perspt-coding`` unless implementation experience suggests a clearer crate
name. The coding package SHALL provide:

* repository and language detection;
* coding-specific project profiles;
* language adapters for Rust, Python, and JavaScript/TypeScript;
* compiler, LSP, AST, import graph, symbol graph, formatter, build, and test
  sensors;
* source-edit artifact bundle helpers;
* language-specific residual classes and correction-direction mappers;
* dependency and manifest mutation policies;
* coding benchmark fixtures and mechanism checks.

The SDK/domain split SHALL be visible in the CLI and MAY introduce breaking
changes. The preferred entry point SHOULD make the selected domain explicit,
for example ``perspt agent --domain coding "<task>"`` or a dedicated
domain-oriented command. Legacy command aliases are out of scope for this PSP.
Domain selection is a routing decision; it SHALL NOT bypass the SDK's
admissibility, residual, scheduler, ledger, or dashboard contracts.

The extension stack SHALL be layered:

.. code-block:: text

   perspt-cli / perspt-tui / perspt-dashboard
                 |
          generic perspt-agent runtime
                 |
              perspt-sdk
                 |
     +-----------+-------------+----------------+
     |                         |                |
   perspt-coding        perspt-research   perspt-website
     |
   Rust/Python/TypeScript language adapters

Initial implementations MAY compile first-party domain packages in-process for
simplicity. The SDK SHALL still define process boundaries clearly enough that
future WASM or process-isolated packages can be added without redefining
residual, capability, graph, or ledger semantics.

2. SRBN Kernel Semantics
========================

Perspt SHALL make the SRBN kernel semantics explicit in code rather than treating
them as documentation terms.

The SDK proxy state SHALL be:

* the current workspace state or sandbox branch,
* the current work graph revision,
* the active node generation,
* the ledger head,
* the capability set granted to the current actor,
* the verifier residual vector for the current candidate, and
* the candidate artifact, patch, command, or domain action proposal under
  review.

Every generated artifact, patch, command, graph rewrite, dependency mutation,
research claim set, website build action, or domain-specific action SHALL be a
candidate state first. A candidate enters the accepted trajectory only if it
passes one of the accepted-state gates:

* **Hard pass:** all required verifiers for the node scope pass and all hard
  policy constraints pass.
* **Measured descent:** the candidate reduces the energy below the best accepted
  energy by at least ``rho_gate`` and remains inside policy, budget, and
  capability bounds.
* **Certified stop:** the system cannot reach stability, so it terminates with a
  residual certificate naming the remaining residuals, verifier routes, budget
  state, and ledger head.

Perspt SHALL distinguish the observed trajectory from the accepted trajectory:

* observed attempts include malformed bundles, stripped bundles, denied commands,
  non-descending patches, failed tests, and rejected graph revisions;
* accepted attempts include only hard-pass or descent-gated states;
* rejected attempts are retained as training/audit data but are never treated as
  committed progress.

Residual scores SHALL be finite and non-negative. A sensor failure SHALL produce
either a V_boot residual or an explicit degraded-validation stop; it SHALL NOT be
silently interpreted as zero energy.

Mathematical SRBN Contract
--------------------------

The SDK SHALL implement the paper theory as a measurable runtime contract. The
theory is conditional: Perspt claims SRBN stability only for a declared domain,
state proxy, residual schema, verifier route, correction channel, disturbance
estimate, and accepted trajectory.

For a WorkGraph revision with nodes ``N`` and typed edges ``E``, each executable
node or sealed interface contributes a local state component ``x_i``. Each edge
``e = (i, j)`` has a restriction or comparison map ``rho_e`` supplied by the
domain package. The domain package SHALL map verifier evidence into residuals:

.. math::

   r_e(x) = \rho_e(x_i) - x_j

and the SDK SHALL compute the canonical non-negative weighted energy:

.. math::

   V(x) = \sum_{e \in E} w_e \|r_e(x)\|^2,\qquad w_e > 0.

This weighted sum of squared edge residuals SHALL be the single energy that
gates acceptance, feeds the finite-decision bound, and is recorded for replay.
Each ``ResidualEvent`` SHALL store the raw residual magnitude ``r_e >= 0``; the
SDK SHALL square and weight it when computing ``V``. The component aggregates
``V_syn``, ``V_str``, ``V_log``, ``V_boot``, and ``V_sheaf`` SHALL be derived
rollups of this same quadratic energy, grouped by ``EnergyComponent``:

.. math::

   V_{\mathrm{comp}} = \sum_{e \in \mathrm{comp}} w_e \|r_e(x)\|^2,
   \qquad
   V(x) = \sum_{\mathrm{comp}} V_{\mathrm{comp}}.

The component rollups are user-visible projections only. They SHALL NOT carry
independent weights and SHALL NOT be summed through a second weighting pass.
Every edge residual SHALL carry an explicit weight ``w_e``; no component SHALL
default to an implicit weight of ``1`` while others are weighted.

The safe set for the declared proxy is the zero-energy set:

.. math::

   \mathcal{M}_{\mathrm{safe}}
      = \{x \in \mathcal{D} \mid V(x) = 0\}.

For coding, an edge residual may be a compiler diagnostic cluster, import graph
mismatch, public signature mismatch, failing test attribution, formatter
residual, or policy residual. For research, the same equation can use claim-to-
source residuals. For website-building, it can use build, accessibility,
visual-layout, and deployment residuals. The SDK owns the energy equation and
trace; domain packages own the residual construction and weights.

Perspt's primary contract is the measured discrete energy and gate. The
continuous embedding-space constants ``alpha`` (correction strength), ``beta``
(drift strength), ``delta`` (persistent disturbance), ``L`` (smoothness), and
``eta`` (step size) require a gradient field ``v(x) = -alpha grad V(x)`` and a
drift field ``f(x)`` on an exposed or estimated continuous coordinate. The
coding domain operates on discrete verifier residuals and exposes no such
coordinate, so these constants are expected to remain ``NotClaimed`` for it. The
SDK SHALL treat ``alpha``, ``beta``, ``delta``, ``L``, and ``eta`` as optional
records that a domain package MAY register only when it can instrument them; it
SHALL NOT require them, build acceptance on them, or display analytic floors
derived from them unless they are registered with evidence.

When a domain can expose or estimate a continuous correction coordinate, the
paper model uses transverse error dynamics:

.. math::

   \dot{x} = f(x) + v(x),\qquad
   v(x) = -\alpha \nabla V(x).

The runtime SHALL NOT assume these equations hold globally. It SHALL record the
declared constants and evidence for the local analysis domain when a domain
package claims them:

.. math::

   \langle \nabla V(x), v(x)\rangle
      \le -\alpha \|\nabla V(x)\|^2,
   \qquad
   \|f(x)\| \le \beta \|\nabla V(x)\| + \delta,
   \qquad
   \|\nabla V(x)\|^2 \ge 2\mu V(x).

When these conditions are justified on the analyzed sublevel set, the SDK MAY
report the input-to-state-stability energy floor:

.. math::

   V_{\infty}
      = \frac{\delta^2}{2(\alpha-\beta)^2\mu},
   \qquad \alpha > \beta,\quad \mu > 0.

The implementation SHALL treat ``V_infty`` as a declared or estimated floor, not
as a magical success condition. A candidate above the floor still requires hard
checks, measured descent, or a residual certificate.

The energy-slope constant ``mu`` is the exception: for the quadratic residual
energy ``V(x) = x^T A x`` with ``A = B^T W B``, it is combinatorial rather than
embedding-dependent and SHALL be computable from the WorkGraph verification
structure:

.. math::

   \mu = 2\,\lambda_{\min}^{+}(A),

the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of ``A``. In the identity-restriction case
``A`` reduces to the weighted Laplacian of the verification graph and ``mu`` is
its algebraic connectivity (Fiedler value). The SDK SHALL expose ``mu`` as a
spectral diagnostic of the active verification graph and SHALL be able to report
the change in ``mu`` produced by adding a candidate verifier edge, so that an
independent verifier that raises the spectral gap is distinguishable from a
redundant verifier that does not.

``mu`` is a diagnostic, not an input to the acceptance gate. It SHALL be
computed off the critical path -- on graph-revision commit, when the graph
structure stabilizes, or asynchronously -- and SHALL NOT block worker dispatch,
candidate verification, or the acceptance-gate decision. During high graph
churn the SDK MAY report the last computed ``mu`` with its source revision.

For discrete corrections, the SDK SHALL store the proposed step size ``eta`` and
MAY validate it against the paper's sufficient bound when the domain provides
the smoothness constant ``L``:

.. math::

   0 < \eta <
   \min\left\{
      \frac{2(\alpha-\beta)}{L(\alpha+\beta)^2},
      \frac{1}{2\mu(\alpha-\beta)}
   \right\}.

Under that declared model, the expected geometric factor is:

.. math::

   c(\eta) = (\alpha-\beta)
      - \frac{L\eta(\alpha+\beta)^2}{2},
   \qquad
   V(x_k) \le (1 - 2\eta c(\eta)\mu)^k V(x_0).

The acceptance gate used by Perspt is the measured discrete contract from the
harness paper, and it SHALL apply even when the continuous assumptions are not
available:

.. math::

   \operatorname{accept}(y_{k+1})
      \Longleftrightarrow
      \operatorname{hard}(y_{k+1})
      \lor
      V(y_{k+1}) \le V(x_k^{\mathrm{best}})
         - \rho_{\mathrm{gate}}.

Descent SHALL be measured against the best accepted energy ``V(x_k^best)``, not
the most recent accepted energy. There SHALL be a single descent tolerance
``rho_gate > 0``. ``min_descent`` is not a second gate threshold; where a domain
records a predicted analytic decrease, it is advisory only and SHALL NOT relax
or replace ``rho_gate`` in the gate decision.

Otherwise the candidate is rejected for the accepted trajectory:

.. math::

   x_{k+1}^{\mathrm{accepted}} \leftarrow x_k^{\mathrm{best}}.

With ``V >= 0``, descent threshold ``rho_gate > 0``, baseline energy ``V_0``,
and finite rejection budget ``B``, a run SHALL have the finite-decision bound:

.. math::

   N_{\mathrm{gate}}
      \le
      \left\lfloor \frac{V_0}{\rho_{\mathrm{gate}}} \right\rfloor
      + B + 1.

The SDK SHALL expose this bound in telemetry whenever the run has a fixed
``rho_gate`` and correction budget.

At platform level, every effect proposal SHALL satisfy the capability
admissibility predicate before any durable effect occurs. For proposal
``p = (a, c, i, y, e, \mu_p)`` and candidate next state ``x'``:

.. math::

   \operatorname{Adm}(x,p,x') = 1

only if all of the following hold:

.. math::

   (a,c) \in \Gamma(x),\qquad
   i \in I_c,\quad y \in Y_c,\quad
   A_c(x,i),\quad G_c(x,i,y,x'),\qquad
   e \in \operatorname{eff}(c) \cap E_c,

.. math::

   \mathbb{E}[h(x') \mid x,p] \le h(x) + c_c,
   \qquad
   \operatorname{spent}(x) + c_c \le \rho_c.

The capability attenuation preorder SHALL be represented explicitly:

.. math::

   c' \preceq c
   \Longleftrightarrow
   \operatorname{op}_{c'} = \operatorname{op}_c
   \land E_{c'} \subseteq E_c
   \land q_{c'} \le q_c
   \land \tau_{c'} \le \tau_c
   \land d_{c'} \le d_c.

Delegation SHALL only create capabilities satisfying the preorder. Payload data,
model text, or generated code SHALL NOT mint authority.

For scheduler and dashboard observability, the SDK SHALL compute backlog
potential from active work:

.. math::

   \phi_i = 1 + \frac{V_i}{\rho_{\mathrm{gate}}} + B_i,
   \qquad
   \Phi(W) = \sum_{i \in W} \phi_i.

``Phi(W)`` SHALL be presented as a backlog and remaining-work gauge for the
dashboard and for ETA projection. The platform-level Foster-Lyapunov drift
condition

.. math::

   \mathbb{E}\left[
      \Phi(W_{t+1}) - \Phi(W_t) \mid \mathcal{F}_t
   \right]
   \le -\epsilon,
   \qquad
   \epsilon = 1 - \alpha_{\mathrm{load}} > 0

requires a stochastic workflow arrival process with a measurable sub-critical
load ``alpha_load < 1``. A single-session run has no arrival process, so its
potential is monotone non-increasing and the drift condition is trivially
satisfied. Perspt SHALL NOT present the drift condition as a conformance result
in single-session execution. A deployment MAY record ``alpha_load`` and check
the drift condition only in a multi-session or server mode where the arrival
process exists.

The implementation SHALL distinguish between *measured SRBN conformance* and
*analytic stability claims*. Measured conformance is mandatory: Perspt must
compute residuals, energy, gate decisions, correction directions, residual
certificates, and replay records for every run. Analytic claims are stricter:
Perspt may display ``V_infty``, step-size certificates, or platform drift claims
only when the domain package provides the corresponding constants, evidence, and
ledger measurements. A missing constant is not a soft pass; it is an explicit
``NotClaimed`` analytic status.

SRBN Conformance Gates
----------------------

Implementation may be staged, but each stage is a named conformance gate, not a
relaxation of the PSP. Perspt SHALL NOT present a run, release, or benchmark as
PSP-8-complete unless all applicable gates below pass.

**Gate A: Kernel and energy conformance**
  ``perspt-sdk`` uses ``srbn`` and ``srbn-serde`` for stabilization traces where
  applicable. Every candidate has a finite non-negative residual vector, a
  declared ``EnergyModel``, a computed energy, and a gate decision. The measured
  acceptance gate is mandatory.

**Gate B: Harness conformance**
  Observed and accepted trajectories are separated. Non-descending candidates
  are retained as observations and excluded from accepted progress. Exhaustion
  yields a residual certificate. The prompt compiler receives dominant
  residuals and correction directions, never undirected retry text.

**Gate C: Mutable graph conformance**
  WorkGraph revisions are acyclic, revisioned, and replayable. Repair actions
  become scheduler effects. Inserted, split, reset, or requeued nodes are
  executable in the same session when dependencies and leases permit.

**Gate D: Coding-domain verifier conformance**
  ``perspt-coding`` implements SDK-native verifier suites for Rust, Python, and
  JavaScript/TypeScript. Each suite provides parser/AST or structural evidence,
  symbol/import/interface extraction where available, compiler/type/test/build
  sensors, degraded-sensor residuals, and correction-direction mappers.

**Gate E: Capability platform conformance**
  Every effect is mediated by an admissibility witness. Authority, contract,
  effect scope, barrier/risk clauses, attenuation, idempotency, and state
  witnesses are checked outside generated code.

**Gate F: Durable replay conformance**
  The event ledger records proposals, observations, residuals, energy models,
  gate decisions, verifier outputs, effects, graph revisions, capability
  changes, workflow potentials, and rollback/undo. Replay reconstructs the same
  accepted trajectory from recorded observations without re-running stochastic
  sources.

**Gate G: Spectral and analytic-claim conformance**
  The SDK computes the spectral energy-slope constant ``mu = 2 lambda_min+(A)``
  from the quadratic residual energy and exposes it as a verification-graph
  diagnostic. This spectral computation is required, computed off the critical
  path so that it never blocks dispatch or the acceptance gate. The continuous
  and
  stochastic analytic claims are optional and not required for PSP-8
  completion: a run that claims them must register a ``StabilityClaim`` with the
  relevant constants, the analysis domain, and evidence references, after which
  the SDK computes ``V_infty`` and step-size checks; a run without those
  constants remains measured-conformant and analytically ``NotClaimed``. The
  coding domain is expected to remain ``NotClaimed`` for the continuous
  constants.

**Gate H: Backlog-potential conformance**
  Active work exposes per-item potential ``phi_i`` and aggregate potential
  ``Phi(W)`` as a backlog gauge. This gauge is required. Platform-level
  Foster-Lyapunov drift claims are optional and apply only to a multi-session or
  server deployment with a measurable sub-critical load; they are not required
  for single-session PSP-8 completion.

**Gate I: Calibrated risk-budget conformance**
  When a deployment enables autonomous commitment without per-effect approval,
  validator acceptance thresholds are calibrated from the deployment's own
  ledger by conformal risk control so that the marginal accepted-unsafe rate is
  bounded by the declared budget. A drift monitor compares the live validator
  score distribution against the calibration distribution and flags the
  calibration stale when they diverge. A stale flag degrades gracefully to a
  conservative back-off plus risk-class approval and an uncertified status,
  never a hard halt, and triggers background recalibration. This gate is
  required only when autonomous commitment is enabled.

.. csv-table:: SRBN Theory to SDK Implementation Trace
   :header: "Paper object", "SDK representation", "Required implementation evidence"
   :widths: 24, 32, 44

   "Proxy state ``x``", "``WorkspaceSnapshot``, ``WorkGraphRevision``, ledger head, capability set, active candidate", "State witnesses and input digests recorded before proposal, verifier, and commit"
   "Sheaf residual ``r_e``", "``ResidualEvent`` with class, sensor, affected paths/symbols, score, and evidence payload", "Raw tool/LSP/test/AST/policy evidence normalized into finite non-negative residual score"
   "Energy ``V``", "``EnergyModel`` and ``EnergyComponents``", "Weights, residual vector, component totals, and total energy recorded for every candidate"
   "Safe set ``M_safe``", "Hard gates plus zero/tolerance energy condition", "Hard-check results, degraded sensors, and declared tolerance recorded with gate decision"
   "Correction field ``v`` or discrete correction route", "``CorrectionDirection`` and prompt-compiler input package", "Dominant residual cluster, selected correction route, model/tool route, and follow-up verifier result"
   "Accepted trajectory", "``AcceptedTrajectoryRecord`` and ``GateDecision``", "Observed candidates retained; accepted states only hard-pass or satisfy measured descent"
   "Residual certificate", "``ResidualCertificate``", "Final residuals, final energy, exhausted budgets, verifier routes, rejected attempts, and ledger head"
   "Merkle history", "Event-sourced ledger with cryptographic hashes", "Append-only proposal, decision, effect, verifier, graph, and rollback events"
   "Capability ``c`` and authority ``Gamma``", "``Capability`` and ``AdmissibilityWitness``", "Authority, scope, contract, barrier, and risk clauses evaluated outside generated code"
   "Attenuation ``c' <= c``", "Capability delegation rule", "Delegated effect scope, call budget, expiry, and delegability are no greater than source capability"
   "Platform potential ``Phi(W)``", "``WorkflowPotential`` dashboard projection", "Accepted energy, remaining budget, per-workflow potential, aggregate potential, and load estimate"
   "Durable execution obligations", "Replay ledger, command IR, idempotency keys, noncommuting leases", "Recorded nondeterminism, deterministic replay, write-ahead external effects, and serialized durable conflicts"

``perspt-sdk`` SHALL use the published ``srbn`` crate as the canonical SRBN
kernel dependency where the crate's ``run``/``stabilize`` and
``BarrierResult`` contracts fit the SDK loop. ``perspt-sdk`` SHALL use
``srbn-serde`` for serializing SRBN traces and barrier records when those
records enter the Perspt ledger. Perspt SHOULD NOT fork the SRBN kernel logic
inside the agent runtime. If the current crate API is too small for Perspt's
domain packages, Perspt SHOULD add a narrow adapter in ``perspt-sdk`` and feed
the reusable improvement back into the SRBN crate rather than creating a second
kernel.

The adapter boundary SHOULD keep Perspt-specific WorkGraph, capability, command
IR, and ledger types outside the SRBN crate. The SRBN crate owns the generic
stabilization contract; Perspt owns the domain runtime around that contract.

The SDK-side adapter should expose types equivalent to:

.. code-block:: rust

   pub struct AgentBarrierResult {
       pub ok: bool,
       pub score: f64,
       pub residuals: ResidualVector,
       pub feedback: CorrectionDirectionSet,
       pub evidence: VerificationEvidence,
   }

   pub enum AgentStabilizationStatus {
       Stable,
       Descended,
       Stopped,
       Exhausted,
       Degraded,
       ReplanRequired,
   }

   pub struct StabilityParameters {
       pub energy_tolerance: f64,
       pub rho_gate: f64,                  // single descent tolerance for the gate
       pub predicted_descent: Option<f64>, // advisory analytic decrease only
       pub mu: Option<f64>,                // spectral, computed from the graph
       pub alpha: Option<f64>,             // optional; coding domain: NotClaimed
       pub beta: Option<f64>,              // optional; coding domain: NotClaimed
       pub delta: Option<f64>,             // optional; coding domain: NotClaimed
       pub smoothness_l: Option<f64>,      // optional; coding domain: NotClaimed
       pub eta: Option<f64>,               // optional; coding domain: NotClaimed
       pub ultimate_floor: Option<f64>,    // optional; requires alpha,beta,delta,mu
   }

   pub struct EnergyTracePoint {
       pub attempt: u32,
       pub observed_energy: f64,
       pub accepted_energy_before: f64,
       pub accepted_energy_after: Option<f64>,
       pub decision: GateDecision,
       pub dominant_residuals: Vec<ResidualEventRef>,
   }

   pub enum GateDecision {
       HardPass,
       AcceptedByDescent { delta_v: f64 },
       RejectedNonDescending { delta_v: f64 },
       StoppedAtDeclaredFloor,
       ExhaustedWithCertificate { certificate_id: String },
   }

   pub struct ResidualCertificate {
       pub certificate_id: String,
       pub ledger_head: String,
       pub final_energy: f64,
       pub final_residuals: ResidualVector,
       pub exhausted_budgets: Vec<BudgetRef>,
       pub verifier_routes: Vec<IndependenceRoute>,
       pub rejected_attempts: Vec<String>,
       pub next_correction_directions: Vec<CorrectionDirection>,
   }

The adapter SHALL be used by the generic runtime, the coding package, and
correction retries so that Perspt has one stabilization contract.

3. Exploration and Model Routing
================================

Perspt SHALL treat unfamiliar existing codebases as a distinct control problem:
before the agent proposes durable mutations, it needs a cheap, bounded,
read-only understanding of the repository. This exploration phase is evidence
gathering, not implementation.

Exploration SHALL run with read/search/list/LSP/query capabilities by default.
It SHALL NOT write files, mutate dependencies, run package-manager writes,
change graph policy, or apply patches. If an exploration step discovers that a
mutation may be required, it SHALL emit a residual, graph hint, or capability
request rather than performing the mutation.

Exploration outputs SHALL be structured artifacts:

* project map: languages, package roots, build systems, entry points, and
  ownership patterns;
* domain-package and coding-adapter activation evidence plus missing-tool
  residuals;
* symbol and import inventory requests;
* dependency graph and public-interface hints;
* test layout, fixture layout, and likely targeted test commands;
* risk hotspots such as generated code, migrations, unsafe blocks, FFI,
  production configuration, or global state;
* files-to-read and files-to-avoid recommendations;
* WorkGraph seed nodes, edge hints, and verifier-suite recommendations.

Exploration evidence SHALL be advisory unless backed by deterministic tool
output, structural digests, compiler/LSP observations, or repository-local
metadata. A cheap model may summarize or rank evidence, but it SHALL NOT become
an independent correctness barrier merely because it observed the codebase.

Model routing SHALL be phase-aware:

* Perspt SHALL support an explicit exploration model override through
  ``explorer_model`` in config and ``--explorer-model`` on the CLI.
* If no exploration model is configured, exploration SHALL default to the
  cheapest configured tier suitable for read-only summarization. In the current
  Perspt tier model this SHOULD be ``speculator_model``.
* Implementations MAY avoid adding a fifth ``ModelTier`` by treating Explorer as
  a phase routed to ``ModelTier::Speculator`` by default.
* Implementations MAY expose ``--explorer-tier`` with values such as
  ``speculator``, ``verifier``, ``actuator``, and ``architect`` for users who
  want exploration to reuse one of the existing tier models.
* ``--model`` SHALL continue to set all tiers unless a phase-specific override
  is provided.
* Exploration SHALL have independent budgets: file count, token count, tool
  calls, wall-clock time, and maximum parallel workers.
* ``--exploration-only`` SHOULD run the read-only inventory and write a project
  profile or exploration report without entering build mode.

Exploration SHALL be parallel by default where safe:

* file tree scans, ``rg``/``git grep`` searches, package metadata reads, LSP
  symbol requests, AST extraction, and test discovery MAY run concurrently;
* model summarization of independent repository slices MAY run concurrently
  under the exploration budget;
* each exploration task SHALL record its model route, capability use, input
  digests, and output evidence;
* planner prompts SHALL receive summarized exploration artifacts with provenance,
  not unbounded raw repository text.

This layer directly supports the user need that an existing codebase often must
be explored before useful planning is possible, and that this work can use a
lower-cost model without weakening SRBN acceptance gates.

4. Mutable Work Graph
=====================

Perspt SHALL replace static "plan DAG execution" with a mutable, revisioned work
graph. Each graph revision SHALL be acyclic, but the session as a whole MAY add,
retire, split, merge, update, or requeue nodes as verifier evidence changes.
The scheduler SHALL run independent work in parallel and serialize only work
that conflicts through dependencies, leases, or non-commuting durable effects.

This resolves the central limitation: software tasks are not known completely at
planning time. A compiler error may reveal a missing module. A test failure may
require a fixture node. An AST search may reveal a wider API migration. A
dependency conflict may require a manifest repair node. A static DAG cannot
faithfully model this; a revisioned acyclic work graph can.

Perspt SHALL distinguish:

* **PlanGraph:** the architect's current hypothesis about task decomposition.
* **WorkGraph:** the scheduler's executable graph with node generations,
  leases, locks, ownership, and verifier status.
* **GraphRevision:** a durable version of the WorkGraph produced by planning,
  local repair, scope expansion, or user edit.
* **NodeGeneration:** an immutable incarnation of a node. Updating a node creates
  a new generation instead of mutating the old one in place.
* **RetiredNode:** a node generation that remains in the ledger but is no longer
  executable.

The scheduler SHALL not precompute one vector of topological indices and walk it
to completion. It SHALL use a dependency-aware mutable ready queue:

1. load active graph revision;
2. select executable nodes whose dependencies are stable, blocked sensors are
   resolved, and required leases are available;
3. execute one or more non-conflicting node generations through speculate,
   verify, converge, sheaf pre-check, sheaf validate, and commit;
4. convert repair outcomes into durable scheduler commands;
5. apply graph revisions atomically;
6. recompute the ready queue;
7. repeat until every active node is stable, certified stopped, or escalated.

.. graphviz::
   :caption: Mutable Parallel Scheduler
   :align: center

   digraph psp8_scheduler {
     rankdir=TB;
     bgcolor="transparent";
     splines=ortho;
     node [shape=box, style="rounded,filled", fontname="Arial", fontsize=10, margin="0.18,0.10"];
     edge [fontname="Arial", fontsize=9, color="#546E7A", fontcolor="#455A64"];

     revision [label="Active WorkGraph\nacyclic revision", fillcolor="#FFF3E0", color="#FB8C00"];
     ready [label="Mutable ready queue\ndependencies satisfied", fillcolor="#E3F2FD", color="#1E88E5"];
     leases [label="Lease table\nfiles, interfaces, tools", fillcolor="#EDE7F6", color="#5E35B1"];
     worker_pool [label="Worker pool\nbounded parallelism", fillcolor="#ECEFF1", color="#607D8B"];
     explorer [label="Explorer workers\nread/search/LSP", fillcolor="#E8F5E9", color="#43A047"];
     verifier [label="Verifier workers\nbuild/test/AST", fillcolor="#FCE4EC", color="#D81B60"];
     implementer [label="Implementer workers\ncandidate bundles", fillcolor="#E1F5FE", color="#039BE5"];
     effects [label="Scheduler effects\ncommit, retry, split, stop", fillcolor="#FFF8E1", color="#F9A825"];
     validate [label="Revision validation\nacyclic + witnessed", fillcolor="#E0F2F1", color="#00897B"];
     ledger [label="Event ledger\nspawn/join/cancel", fillcolor="#F1F8E9", color="#689F38"];

     revision -> ready;
     ready -> leases [label="request"];
     leases -> worker_pool [label="grant / wait"];
     worker_pool -> explorer;
     worker_pool -> verifier;
     worker_pool -> implementer;
     explorer -> effects;
     verifier -> effects;
     implementer -> effects;
     effects -> validate [label="graph-changing"];
     validate -> revision [label="revision N+1"];
     effects -> ready [label="requeue / spawn"];
     effects -> ledger;
     leases -> ledger;
     worker_pool -> ledger;
   }

Two durable turns commute, and therefore need no relative order, only when
their semantic read and write footprints are disjoint:

.. math::

   \operatorname{writes}(e) \cap \operatorname{reads}(e') = \emptyset
   \quad\text{and}\quad
   \operatorname{writes}(e') \cap \operatorname{reads}(e) = \emptyset.

The conflict footprint SHALL include durable platform state, not only
workspace files. The capability table, risk budgets, fresh-identifier
allocation, and the ledger root SHALL be modeled as read/write state
components. Because admissibility reads the capability table, any capability
grant, attenuation, or revocation conflicts with every commit that touches the
affected capabilities and SHALL serialize against them. Any turn that reads or
updates a risk budget, allocates a fresh identifier, or advances the ledger root
SHALL be ordered against other turns with an overlapping footprint.

Parallel scheduling rules:

* read-only exploration, verifier, symbol-index, and search tasks MAY run
  concurrently when their read/write footprints are disjoint;
* implementation nodes MAY run concurrently only when their output targets,
  dependency interfaces, toolchain locks, state witnesses, capability grants,
  and budget reads do not conflict;
* correction attempts for unrelated residual clusters MAY run concurrently, but
  accepted artifact commits SHALL serialize if they touch overlapping files,
  public interfaces, dependency manifests, lockfiles, migrations, shared test
  fixtures, capabilities, budgets, or the ledger root;
* graph revisions SHALL acquire a graph-write lease and are serialized against
  other graph revisions;
* package-manager writes, formatter writes, generated-code refreshes, and
  database/schema migrations SHALL use explicit toolchain or resource leases;
* scheduler fairness SHALL prevent a flood of cheap exploration tasks from
  starving verifier or commit tasks.

Perspt SHALL expose concurrency controls:

* ``max_parallel``: total worker limit;
* ``max_parallel_exploration``: read-only exploration worker limit;
* ``max_parallel_verifiers``: verifier/tool worker limit;
* ``max_parallel_model_calls``: concurrent LLM call limit;
* ``max_parallel_mutations``: artifact-application limit, defaulting to 1.

Every parallel task SHALL have a parent activity, worker id, model route if any,
capability set, lease set, input witnesses, cancellation policy, and join event.
If a dependency changes while a task is running, the task SHALL be cancelled,
revalidated, or converted into an observed rejected attempt before any effect is
accepted.

Repair actions SHALL return scheduler work items:

* ``RetryNode(node_generation, evidence)``
* ``ExpandScope(node_generation, added_paths, reason)``
* ``SplitNode(node_generation, child_specs)``
* ``InsertInterfaceNode(boundary_spec)``
* ``AddNode(node_spec, edges, reason)``
* ``RetireNode(node_generation, reason)``
* ``ReplanSubgraph(root, affected_nodes, evidence)``
* ``StopNode(node_generation, residual_certificate)``

``execute_node`` SHALL NOT return ``Escalated`` after a local repair action has
successfully produced new executable work. It SHALL return a scheduler effect
that is consumed by the ready-queue loop.

Graph revision rules:

* every revision SHALL validate acyclicity before activation;
* edge creation SHALL be serialized as a graph-write conflict;
* a node MAY be updated only by creating a new generation;
* descendants whose structural dependencies changed SHALL be requeued or retired;
* graph revisions SHALL consume the revision budget;
* graph churn SHALL be bounded by lineage and by session;
* graph revisions SHALL include the verifier evidence that justified them;
* replay SHALL reconstruct the same active graph sequence.

Edges SHALL carry typed semantics:

* ``RequiresArtifact``: destination reads a file produced by source;
* ``RequiresInterface``: destination relies on a sealed signature/schema/symbol;
* ``Tests``: destination test node validates source implementation node;
* ``Integrates``: destination reconciles cross-node, cross-domain, or
  cross-adapter boundaries;
* ``ConflictsWith``: nodes touch non-commuting durable state and must serialize;
* ``DerivedFrom``: graph-rewrite lineage edge for audit;
* ``BlocksOnSensor``: node cannot execute until a required verifier sensor exists
  or is explicitly downgraded.

5. SDK Domain Packages and Coding Verifier Suites
=================================================

The SDK SHALL define domain-package contracts instead of making language plugins
the root extension point. A domain package SHALL be able to provide:

* domain detection and activation evidence;
* domain-specific project/profile generation;
* exploration tasks and context packers;
* verifier/sensor suites;
* residual classifiers and correction-direction mappers;
* artifact bundle schemas and validation;
* capability templates and policy defaults;
* graph node templates and edge inference;
* benchmark fixtures and mechanism checks;
* dashboard projection labels and domain-specific summaries.

The core SDK trait SHOULD look like this, with exact names left to
implementation:

.. code-block:: rust

   pub trait AgentDomainPackage: Send + Sync {
       fn domain_id(&self) -> DomainId;
       fn detect(&self, workspace: &WorkspaceSnapshot) -> DomainDetection;
       fn residual_schema(&self, scope: &DomainScope) -> ResidualSchema;
       fn energy_model(&self, scope: &DomainScope) -> EnergyModel;
       fn exploration_plan(&self, task: &TaskCharter) -> Vec<ExplorationWork>;
       fn verifier_suites(&self, scope: &DomainScope) -> Vec<Box<dyn VerifierSuite>>;
       fn hard_gates(&self, scope: &DomainScope) -> Vec<Box<dyn HardGate>>;
       fn context_package(&self, request: ContextRequest) -> ContextPackage;
       fn correction_directions(&self, residuals: &[ResidualEvent]) -> Vec<CorrectionDirection>;
       fn capability_policy(&self) -> DomainCapabilityPolicy;
       fn graph_hints(&self, evidence: &ExplorationReport) -> Vec<GraphHint>;
   }

The ``ResidualSchema`` and ``EnergyModel`` SHALL declare:

* residual classes and their allowed sensors;
* normalization from raw tool output to finite non-negative scores;
* residual weights ``w_e`` and hard-check thresholds;
* the mapping from residuals into ``V_syn``, ``V_str``, ``V_log``, ``V_boot``,
  and ``V_sheaf``;
* the default ``rho_gate``, energy tolerance, and correction budgets;
* optional local stability constants ``alpha``, ``beta``, ``delta``, ``mu``,
  ``L``, and ``eta`` when the domain claims a mathematical energy tube rather
  than only measured descent.

``perspt-coding`` SHALL implement this trait. Inside ``perspt-coding``,
language adapters SHALL evolve from command selectors into verifier-suite
providers. A coding language adapter SHALL be able to provide:

* repository detection and ownership patterns;
* parser or AST provider;
* symbol inventory extraction;
* import/dependency graph extraction;
* public-interface extraction and structural digesting;
* LSP diagnostics and code intelligence;
* compiler/typechecker commands;
* build commands;
* test discovery and targeted test commands;
* lint/formatter commands;
* dependency manager commands and manifest mutation policy;
* tree-search repair candidates;
* logical validators for language-specific invariants;
* degraded-sensor fallback policy;
* correction-direction mappers for all verifier evidence.

First-party coding adapter milestones SHALL include:

**Rust**
  ``rust-analyzer`` diagnostics, ``cargo metadata``, ``cargo check``,
  ``cargo test``, optional ``cargo clippy``, ``cargo fmt --check``, module graph
  extraction, public item/trait signature extraction, missing crate detection,
  feature-flag conflict detection, workspace package target selection, and
  correction directions for unresolved imports, trait bounds, borrow errors,
  visibility errors, missing module declarations, and failing tests.

**Python**
  ``ty`` or ``pyright`` diagnostics, ``uv`` environment checks, ``pytest``
  discovery, optional ``ruff`` and ``mypy``/``pyright`` fallback, import graph
  extraction, package/module layout detection, fixture/test attribution,
  dependency sync checks, and correction directions for missing modules,
  signature mismatches, packaging errors, fixture failures, and import cycles.

**JavaScript/TypeScript**
  package-manager detection, ``tsc --noEmit`` or project-defined typecheck,
  package build/test scripts, ESLint/Prettier where available, import graph and
  export signature extraction, framework-aware test discovery, and correction
  directions for missing exports, tsconfig path aliases, package lock drift,
  bundler failures, and runtime test failures.

Additional coding language adapters MAY follow for Go, Java, C/C++, Ruby,
Swift, and shell, but they SHALL use the same SDK verifier-suite interface.

Other first-party domain packages SHOULD follow the same SDK contracts:

**Research**
  Source discovery, citation provenance, claim extraction, quote bounds,
  contradiction checks, source freshness, bibliography generation, and residuals
  for unsupported claims, stale evidence, source mismatch, and citation gaps.

**Website builder**
  Route discovery, component inventory, build commands, screenshot checks,
  responsive layout validation, accessibility checks, asset validation,
  deployment previews, and residuals for build failure, visual overlap,
  broken assets, accessibility regressions, and deployment-policy denial.

**Task-specific packages**
  Domain authors MAY provide narrow packages for data cleanup, documentation,
  migrations, release automation, or compliance review. They SHALL reuse SDK
  graph, residual, capability, ledger, and dashboard contracts.

Verifiers are not limited to compilers and LSPs. A domain package or coding
adapter MAY use:

* AST queries;
* bounded tree search over imports, symbols, package versions, or migration
  paths;
* SAT/SMT or property checks;
* repository-local scripts and make targets;
* ``git diff``, ``git grep``, ``rg``, ``find``, ``sort``, ``uniq``, ``comm``,
  ``xargs``;
* ``awk`` and ``sed`` as read-only or patch-preview analyzers;
* test shard selection;
* snapshot/regression validators;
* generated fixtures;
* documentation and API schema validators.

These tools SHALL produce typed residual evidence. They SHOULD NOT directly edit
the repository unless invoked through an approved artifact or command effect.

6. Residual Evidence Model
==========================

Perspt SHALL introduce a first-class residual model. A residual is not just a log
line; it is the measured reason the current state is unsafe or incomplete.

.. code-block:: rust

   pub struct ResidualEvent {
       pub residual_id: String,
       pub node_id: String,
       pub generation: u32,
       pub component: EnergyComponent,
       pub class: ResidualClass,
       pub severity: ResidualSeverity,
       pub score: f64,
       pub sensor: SensorRef,
       pub evidence: EvidencePayload,
       pub affected_paths: Vec<PathBuf>,
       pub affected_symbols: Vec<SymbolRef>,
       pub correction_directions: Vec<CorrectionDirection>,
       pub independence_route: IndependenceRoute,
   }

   pub enum ResidualClass {
       Syntax,
       Type,
       Build,
       TestFailure,
       Lint,
       Format,
       Runtime,
       Dependency,
       Manifest,
       ImportGraph,
       SymbolMismatch,
       InterfaceMismatch,
       OwnershipViolation,
       ContextDrift,
       Regression,
       Policy,
       SensorUnavailable,
       ToolFailure,
       SheafInconsistency,
       CapabilityDenied,
       BudgetExhausted,
   }

Each verifier residual SHALL map into one SRBN energy component, which is the
rollup that groups its squared weighted residual:

* V_syn: syntax, parser, typechecker, and compiler diagnostics caused by the
  candidate;
* V_str: structural contract, ownership, import graph, symbol, interface,
  formatting, lint, and invariant residuals;
* V_log: failing tests, snapshots, property checks, and behavioral validators;
* V_boot: toolchain, dependency, package sync, sandbox, missing binary, and
  degraded-sensor residuals;
* V_sheaf: cross-node, cross-domain, and cross-adapter consistency residuals.

The energy components are the derived rollups defined in System 2; they are
telemetry projections of the single quadratic residual energy.

``CapabilityDenied`` and ``BudgetExhausted`` are admissibility outcomes, not
verifier consistency residuals. They SHALL be recorded on a separate blocked
channel and SHALL NOT be summed into the Lyapunov energy ``V`` or treated as a
residual to be corrected by regeneration.

A degraded sensor means the energy for its component is unknown, not low. When a
required sensor is unavailable, the node SHALL take a degraded-validation stop
and emit a residual certificate rather than accepting descent on an energy that
is missing a required component. A ``V_boot`` residual for a degraded sensor is
permitted only for sensors that are not required for the node scope.

Correction prompts SHALL be generated from dominant residuals:

1. sort residuals by weighted score and dependency order;
2. cluster residuals by likely root cause;
3. choose correction directions from domain-package or coding-adapter mappers;
4. include the minimal structural context required by those directions;
5. ask the model to produce a bundle addressing the named residuals;
6. verify whether the same residuals decreased or disappeared.

Undirected retries SHALL be considered a bug. If Perspt cannot produce a
correction direction, it SHALL say so and either run another verifier, ask a
bounded question, or escalate with a residual certificate.

Verifier independence SHALL be recorded for every residual:

* deterministic tool;
* compiler/typechecker;
* LSP;
* test oracle;
* formal/logical solver;
* repository script;
* external API;
* separate model/provider;
* same-model critique.

Dashboard and status views SHALL make same-model critique visibly weaker than
deterministic or independent routes. Same-model critique SHALL NOT contribute a
full-weight descent acceptance.

Verifier independence SHALL be measured, not assumed. The ledger SHALL retain
each validator's verdict per candidate so that pairwise miss rates ``q_i`` and
miss correlation ``kappa_ij`` are computable from history. For a conjunctive
verifier gate the effective ensemble miss bound is

.. math::

   \rho_{\mathrm{eff}}
      = \min_{i<j} \left( q_i q_j + \kappa_{ij}\,\sigma_i \sigma_j \right),
   \qquad \sigma_i = \sqrt{q_i (1 - q_i)}.

Residual weights ``w_e`` SHALL be reduced for verifiers whose measured
correlation with an already-counted verifier is high, so that a redundant
validator does not contribute the weight of an independent one. Duplicate
validators SHALL NOT be counted as independent merely because they appear twice,
and status views SHALL surface ``rho_eff`` rather than a raw count of validators.

7. Capability-Constrained Admissibility
=======================================

Perspt SHALL adopt Paper III's platform rule: stochastic components emit
proposals, never unmediated effects.

Every effect SHALL pass through an admissibility kernel before execution:

.. code-block:: rust

   pub struct EffectProposal {
       pub proposal_id: String,
       pub actor: ActorId,
       pub node_id: String,
       pub generation: u32,
       pub effect: EffectKind,
       pub scope: EffectScope,
       pub risk: RiskClass,
       pub idempotency_key: String,
       pub preconditions: Vec<StateWitness>,
       pub evidence: Vec<ResidualEventRef>,
   }

   pub struct Capability {
       pub capability_id: String,
       pub holder: ActorId,
       pub effects: Vec<EffectKind>,
       pub path_scope: Vec<PathPattern>,
       pub command_scope: Vec<CommandPattern>,
       pub network_scope: Vec<NetworkPattern>,
       pub max_calls: Option<u32>,
       pub expires_at: Option<i64>,
       pub may_delegate: bool,
       pub risk_budget: Option<RiskBudget>,
       pub approval_policy: ApprovalPolicy,
   }

Effect classes SHALL include:

* ``ReadFile``
* ``Search``
* ``List``
* ``LspQuery``
* ``WriteArtifact``
* ``ApplyPatch``
* ``MoveFile``
* ``DeleteFile``
* ``RunVerifier``
* ``RunFormatter``
* ``RunTest``
* ``RunBuild``
* ``MutateDependencies``
* ``RunRepoScript``
* ``RunShell``
* ``GitRead``
* ``GitWrite``
* ``NetworkFetch``
* ``AskUser``
* ``SpawnAgent``
* ``UpdateGraph``
* ``UpdatePolicy``

The kernel SHALL evaluate:

* actor holds a matching capability;
* requested effect is in capability scope;
* path and command scopes are workspace-bounded unless the user explicitly
  grants external scope;
* capability call budget is not exhausted;
* risk budget is not exhausted;
* approval policy is satisfied;
* state witnesses still match at execution time;
* policy rules do not deny the effect;
* command parsing is canonical and not hidden inside shell composition unless a
  ``RunShell`` capability explicitly permits it;
* the proposal is idempotent or guarded by a unique idempotency key.

Default policy:

* read/search/list/LSP query effects MAY be allowed in workspace scope;
* write/patch/move/delete effects SHALL require either user approval or an
  approved session policy;
* dependency mutations SHALL require domain-package policy and approval unless
  explicitly delegated in the session charter;
* arbitrary ``RunShell`` SHALL default to ask;
* network effects SHALL default to ask;
* graph and policy updates SHALL be privileged effects;
* self-modifying agents SHALL NOT be able to grant themselves new capabilities.

Perspt SHALL keep ``perspt-policy`` as the deterministic trusted base for the
kernel. Generated code, prompts, domain packages, adapters, and subagents SHALL
be outside that trusted base.

Calibrated Risk Budgets
-----------------------

A capability risk budget SHALL NOT be an asserted constant when autonomous
commitment without per-effect approval is enabled. The kernel SHALL calibrate
each validator acceptance threshold from the deployment's own ledger by
conformal risk control.

For a validator that emits a safety score ``s(p)`` and accepts when
``s(p) > theta``, the kernel SHALL hold a calibration set of
``(score, outcome)`` pairs in which an outcome is marked unsafe when a later
independent verifier, regression, or reverted commit contradicts the accepted
state. For a target budget ``rho``, the conformal threshold is

.. math::

   \hat{\theta} = \inf\left\{
      \theta \in [0,1] :
      \frac{n\,\hat{R}_n(\theta) + 1}{n + 1} \le \rho
   \right\},

where ``R_n(theta)`` is the empirical accepted-unsafe rate on the calibration
set. The deployed kernel SHALL accept only when ``s(p) > theta_hat``, which
bounds the marginal accepted-unsafe rate by ``rho``.

The delayed unsafe label SHOULD be sourced from the undo/redo boundary and
regression residuals already recorded in the ledger. The kernel SHALL run a
drift monitor that compares the live validator score distribution against the
calibration distribution with a two-sample statistic; when they diverge, the
calibration SHALL be flagged stale and background recalibration SHALL be
triggered.

A stale flag SHALL NOT hard-halt autonomous execution. Software tasks shift
regime routinely, so the runtime SHALL degrade gracefully rather than drop out
of ``auto`` mode. While a calibration is stale the kernel SHALL apply a
conservative back-off -- inflating the accepted threshold and continuing
autonomous commitment for low-risk effects -- while routing high-risk effects to
the risk-class approval policy, and SHALL continue background recalibration.

During the stale window the conformal bound SHALL NOT be asserted: the marginal
accepted-unsafe guarantee holds only under exchangeability, so the back-off
window is uncertified and SHALL be reported as such. Acceptance in that window
rests on the measured gate and the risk-class approval policy, not on a
calibrated budget. When recalibration restores exchangeability, the kernel
SHALL resume asserting the bound.

8. Tool and Command Governance
==============================

The current ``AgentTools`` API SHALL be split into typed tools and command IR.
``sh -c`` SHALL NOT remain as an implicit compatibility path. Shell execution is
allowed only as an explicit ``RunShell`` effect with declared scope,
capability, state witnesses, and ledgered approval.

Command proposals SHALL be parsed into:

.. code-block:: rust

   pub enum CommandInvocation {
       Program {
           program: String,
           args: Vec<String>,
           cwd: PathBuf,
           env: BTreeMap<String, String>,
       },
       Shell {
           script: String,
           cwd: PathBuf,
           declared_reads: Vec<PathBuf>,
           declared_writes: Vec<PathBuf>,
       },
   }

Verifier commands SHALL prefer ``Program`` form. Shell form SHALL require a
capability that names shell execution.

Coreutils, ``awk``, and ``sed`` SHALL be modeled in three tiers:

* **Inspection:** read-only commands such as ``rg``, ``git grep``, ``find``,
  ``sort``, ``uniq``, ``wc``, ``awk`` filters, and ``sed -n``. These can produce
  residual evidence.
* **Patch preview:** transformations that produce a proposed diff but do not
  mutate files. These can feed artifact bundles.
* **Mutation:** commands that directly modify the workspace, such as ``sed -i``,
  generated scripts, package-manager writes, or build-system rewrites. These
  require mutation capabilities and state witnesses.

Every command result SHALL be attached to one of:

* verifier evidence;
* correction evidence;
* artifact application;
* policy denial;
* residual certificate.

9. Agent Roles and Modes
========================

Perspt's "agents" mode SHALL become a capability-bounded role system. Roles are
not trusted because they are named; they are trusted only through capabilities.

Required roles:

* **Explorer/Scout:** performs read-only repository exploration, usually routed
  to the configured exploration model or Speculator tier.
* **Planner:** produces and revises WorkGraph proposals.
* **Implementer:** produces artifact bundles for one node generation.
* **Verifier:** maps tool output into residual events and correction directions.
* **Repair Planner:** chooses scheduler work items from non-convergence evidence.
* **Researcher:** fetches external documentation when allowed.
* **Reviewer:** summarizes diffs, risk, and residual state for the user.
* **Formatter/Test Runner:** executes deterministic repo-native verification
  effects.

Modes:

* ``plan`` mode SHALL disable mutation effects and produce graph proposals,
  residual expectations, and verification plans.
* ``build`` mode SHALL allow artifact and verifier effects inside the approved
  session policy.
* ``review`` mode SHALL run read-only verifiers and produce critique without
  workspace mutation.
* ``auto`` mode SHALL require an explicit session charter naming allowed effects,
  scopes, and budgets.

Subagents SHALL receive attenuated capabilities. A verifier subagent should not
receive artifact-write permissions; a researcher should not receive repository
write permissions; an implementer should not receive policy-update permissions.
Explorer subagents SHALL start read-only and SHALL be budgeted separately from
Planner and Implementer agents.

10. Project Knowledge and Context
=================================

Perspt SHALL introduce a project profile similar in purpose to ``AGENTS.md`` but
owned by Perspt:

* default path: ``.perspt/project.md`` or ``AGENTS.md`` if the project already
  uses it and the user approves importing it;
* contains project architecture, coding conventions, verifier commands, package
  manager choices, test layout, unsafe operations, and known invariants;
* generated by a read-only initialization pass, optionally using parallel
  exploration and the configured exploration model;
* committed only with user approval;
* hashed and referenced by context provenance.

Context assembly SHALL remain graph-derived. Large repositories SHALL not be
stuffed into prompts. Context packages SHALL contain:

* node-owned files;
* sealed interfaces and structural digests of dependencies;
* residual evidence for the active correction;
* symbol/import slices selected by domain-package or coding-adapter analyzers;
* relevant tests and fixtures;
* project profile excerpts with hashes;
* prior accepted ledger summaries, not raw conversational history.

Context drift SHALL produce a residual. If the file, digest, or project profile
used to generate a prompt no longer matches the workspace, the candidate SHALL be
rejected or revalidated before application.

11. Durable Ledger and Replay
=============================

The ledger SHALL become an event-sourced replay contract. It SHALL be possible to
reconstruct:

* the active graph revision at every point;
* every candidate bundle and command proposal;
* every admissibility decision;
* every verifier observation;
* every residual vector and energy snapshot;
* every energy model, weight table, and stability claim used for scoring;
* every accepted-trajectory gate decision;
* every correction direction;
* every graph rewrite;
* every accepted commit;
* every rejected or stripped candidate;
* every rollback and undo action;
* every capability grant, attenuation, expiry, and consumption.

New ledger events SHALL include:

* ``proposal_observed``
* ``admissibility_checked``
* ``effect_applied``
* ``effect_denied``
* ``verifier_started``
* ``verifier_completed``
* ``residual_emitted``
* ``energy_model_registered``
* ``energy_scored``
* ``stability_claim_recorded``
* ``gate_decision_recorded``
* ``candidate_accepted``
* ``candidate_rejected``
* ``correction_direction_selected``
* ``srbn_trace_recorded``
* ``graph_revision_proposed``
* ``graph_revision_accepted``
* ``graph_revision_rejected``
* ``node_generation_retired``
* ``residual_certificate_issued``
* ``rollback_applied``
* ``capability_granted``
* ``capability_consumed``
* ``capability_revoked``
* ``model_route_selected``
* ``parallel_task_spawned``
* ``parallel_task_joined``
* ``parallel_task_cancelled``
* ``workflow_potential_recorded``
* ``lease_acquired``
* ``lease_released``

Perspt SHALL use cryptographic hashes for durable commitments. Non-cryptographic
hashes such as ``DefaultHasher`` MAY be used only for in-memory maps or tests,
not for Merkle, replay, or provenance claims.

Replay SHALL be deterministic over recorded observations. If a verifier used
randomness, wall-clock time, network data, or an external service, the ledger
SHALL record the realized observation needed for replay. Replay SHALL read the
recorded observation, not re-run the external source.

The admissibility kernel SHALL refuse to commit any transition that references
an observation lacking a ledger record. Recording every stochastic observation
before it is used is what makes replay deterministic; the kernel-refusal rule
SHALL enforce it rather than relying on convention.

This rule is a static architectural guarantee at the SDK effect and capability
boundary, not a dynamic operating-system interceptor. The SDK SHALL NOT be
required to trace syscalls or network reads. Instead, domain packages and
adapters SHALL obtain every observation by awaiting SDK-managed ``Effect``
results, and the SDK SHALL record each observation before returning it. A
transition therefore references observations only by their recorded handles or
content addresses, and the kernel refuses any transition that references an
observation with no such record. Structurally confining observation to the
effect API is what discharges the recording obligation; an adapter that reaches
around the effect API for nondeterministic data is outside the contract and its
commits are inadmissible.

The runtime SHALL satisfy six durable-execution obligations:

.. csv-table:: Durable-Execution Obligations
   :header: "Obligation", "Requirement", "Owning crate"
   :widths: 12, 56, 32

   "R1 durable single-assignment outcomes", "Every proposal and every commit or rejection outcome is written once and never reassigned; redelivery of the same idempotency key with equivalent content returns the prior result, and key reuse for different content is invalid", "``perspt-store``"
   "R2 recorded nondeterminism", "Every stochastic observation a transition depends on is committed to the ledger before it is used", "``perspt-store``, ``perspt-agent``"
   "R3 deterministic transition", "The committed transition is a deterministic function of the prior state and the recorded event", "``perspt-agent``"
   "R4 unforgeable capability transport", "Capabilities are minted and checked by the kernel; payload data cannot denote authority; every delegation applies the attenuation check", "``perspt-policy``"
   "R5 write-ahead external effects", "Every irreversible external effect is bracketed by intent, result, and where defined compensation records under a stable idempotency key", "``perspt-sandbox``"
   "R6 ordered non-commuting durable turns", "Non-commuting durable turns are totally ordered; weaker coordination is permitted only for read-only, monotone, commutative, or causally independent work before it crosses a durable boundary", "``perspt-agent``, ``perspt-store``"

12. User Experience
===================

The user experience SHALL expose SRBN evidence rather than hiding it. The
existing web interface is the primary live observability surface for
long-running agent sessions; TUI, CLI, and headless output are compact
projections over the same ledgered events.

TUI and headless output SHALL show:

* active mode: plan, build, review, auto;
* current graph revision and node generation;
* active workers, worker roles, model routes, and blocked wait reasons;
* active capabilities and pending approval requests;
* current verifier suite and degraded sensors;
* grouped diff for the candidate;
* residual vector with dominant residuals first;
* energy before/after candidate;
* correction direction;
* scheduler decision: retry, expand scope, split, insert interface, replan,
  stop, or commit;
* budget state: attempts, steps, graph revisions, cost, and risk if enabled.

The web dashboard SHALL add:

* graph revision timeline;
* parallel worker timeline and blocked-dependency view;
* observed vs accepted trajectory;
* residual heatmap by class, domain package, and adapter;
* verifier independence routes;
* capability grants and denials;
* replay/rollback timeline;
* non-commuting durable commits;
* unstable nodes with suggested next action.

The dashboard SHALL also show what Perspt is doing under the hood while work is
active: current agent role, model route, tool invocation, lease wait, verifier
stage, residual cluster, graph revision proposal, admissibility decision, and
the exact reason a worker is blocked or cancelled. These views SHALL be powered
by read-only projections of the event ledger so monitoring cannot mutate the
running session.

Perspt SHALL support undo/redo at the accepted candidate boundary:

* undo reverts the last accepted artifact commit or graph revision;
* undo creates a new ledger event and never deletes history;
* redo reapplies an undone accepted event only if state witnesses still match;
* undo/redo SHALL NOT rewrite the Merkle history.

13. Evaluation and Benchmarks
=============================

Perspt SHALL not claim SRBN reliability from implementation alone. It SHALL ship
mechanism checks and coding benchmarks that can falsify this PSP's claims.

Mechanism checks:

* SRBN crate integration: the SDK adapter uses ``srbn`` for a minimal
  stabilize/run loop, records terminal status, and serializes the attempt trace
  through ``srbn-serde`` into the Perspt ledger;
* finite energy: every residual vector maps to a finite non-negative energy and
  sensor failure creates V_boot or degraded stop, never zero energy;
* energy equation: a synthetic graph with known residuals verifies
  ``V = sum_e w_e r_e^2`` and rejects negative, NaN, or infinite weights/scores;
* acceptance gate: a hard-pass candidate commits, a candidate with
  ``V_next <= V_accepted - rho_gate`` commits by descent, and a non-descending
  candidate remains observed-only;
* finite-decision bound: with ``V_0``, ``rho_gate``, and budget ``B``, the run
  cannot exceed ``floor(V_0 / rho_gate) + B + 1`` gate decisions before terminal
  classification;
* residual certificate: budget exhaustion emits a certificate with final
  residuals, final energy, verifier routes, rejected attempts, correction
  directions, and ledger head;
* stability-claim validation: when a domain declares ``alpha``, ``beta``,
  ``delta``, ``mu``, ``L``, and ``eta``, the SDK computes ``V_infty`` and checks
  the discrete step-size precondition before displaying a mathematical stability
  claim;
* admissibility witness: every committed effect records authority, contract,
  effect, barrier-increment, and risk-budget decisions;
* attenuation preorder: delegated capabilities can only shrink effect scope,
  call budget, expiry, or delegability;
* platform potential: active workflows expose ``phi_i`` and ``Phi(W)`` so the
  dashboard can show backlog potential and sub-critical load estimates;
* static graph snapshot bug: a local graph rewrite inserts a node and the
  scheduler executes it in the same session;
* reset-node bug: a subgraph replan resets descendants and the scheduler
  revisits them;
* parallel ready queue: two independent read-only or verifier tasks run
  concurrently while a dependent task waits on its edge;
* exploration model routing: read-only repository exploration uses the
  configured exploration model or Speculator-tier fallback and records that
  route;
* conflict lease denial: two mutation tasks touching the same manifest, lockfile,
  or public interface cannot commit concurrently;
* no false stability: missing compiler/test tool creates V_boot or degraded stop;
* residual direction: a Rust unresolved import produces an import/dependency
  correction direction, not an undirected retry;
* capability confinement: a subagent with read-only capability cannot write;
* shell confinement: ``sed -i`` or ``rm`` is denied without mutation capability;
* replay determinism: replayed event stream reconstructs graph, residuals, and
  accepted commits;
* recovery termination: every failure class maps to a bounded recovery path.

Coding benchmark suites:

* Rust crate fixture tasks: add module, refactor API, fix borrow checker error,
  add dependency, preserve public interface, update tests.
* Python package fixture tasks: add module, fix import layout, add dependency,
  update tests, preserve CLI/API behavior.
* TypeScript fixture tasks: add route/component, fix export path, update tests,
  preserve package scripts.
* Polyglot fixture tasks: update schema/client/server boundary.
* Real repository tasks selected from SWE-bench Lite style issues where tests are
  runnable in the local environment.

Metrics:

* final hard-pass rate;
* residual-certified termination rate;
* false-stability rate;
* accepted-energy descent count;
* non-descending candidate rejection count;
* graph revisions per task;
* verifier calls and wall-clock time;
* parallel speedup versus serialized execution;
* blocked-worker time and dominant wait reasons;
* exploration cost, exploration token use, and exploration cache hit rate;
* wasted speculative work cancelled by dependency or witness changes;
* cost and token use;
* capability denials;
* user approvals requested;
* regression count after commit;
* replay success rate;
* SRBN trace serialization round-trip rate;
* accepted energy floor estimate and ``V_infty`` when declared;
* gate-decision bound utilization;
* platform potential ``Phi(W)`` and load estimate ``alpha_load``;
* same-model critique ablation versus independent verifier route.

No benchmark report SHALL omit failed runs. Residual certificates are first-class
outcomes, not discarded failures.

.. rubric:: UI/UX Design

This PSP changes the agent UX from "DAG run with logs" to "stability dashboard
for a mutable coding workflow."

User goals:

* ask for a feature or bug fix in a real repository;
* inspect the plan before mutation;
* understand exactly which tools verified or rejected each candidate;
* approve capabilities at the right granularity;
* see when the agent changed its plan and why;
* recover from wrong turns without history rewriting;
* receive a residual certificate when Perspt cannot finish.

Interaction flow:

1. User runs ``perspt agent --mode plan "<task>"`` or starts in default
   interactive mode.
2. Perspt selects the coding domain package, activates relevant language
   adapters, and explores the repository with read-only capabilities, using the
   configured exploration model or Speculator-tier fallback for cheap summaries.
3. Planner proposes an initial WorkGraph and verifier suite.
4. User approves build mode or edits the graph/session charter.
5. Scheduler executes ready nodes through candidate generation, admissibility,
   verification, correction, and commit.
6. If evidence reveals missing work, Perspt proposes a graph revision and shows
   why it is needed.
7. User can approve, reject, or ask for a narrower revision.
8. Perspt completes with hard-pass success, partial success, or a residual
   certificate.

Headless mode SHALL remain useful in CI or scripted contexts. It SHALL print
structured stage lines and write all rich evidence to the ledger.

.. rubric:: Technical Specification

Crate-level changes:

**perspt-core**
  Keep only low-level shared types, configuration, providers, and event
  primitives that are not part of the agent SDK. The existing language-plugin
  registry MAY be removed or reduced to a temporary migration aid. Public
  domain-neutral agent contracts SHOULD move to ``perspt-sdk`` instead of
  accumulating in ``perspt-core``.

**perspt-sdk**
  Add the reusable SRBN agent SDK: kernel adapter types, residual model,
  correction-direction types, WorkGraph/GraphRevision/NodeGeneration types,
  capability types, admissibility decision types, scheduler effect enums,
  command IR, replay event enums, model-route types, exploration report types,
  parallel-task/lease types, domain-package traits, verifier-suite traits,
  context-package traits, benchmark harness traits, and dashboard projection
  types. Depend on ``srbn`` for the generic stabilization loop and
  ``srbn-serde`` for serializing SRBN traces that enter the ledger.

**perspt-agent**
  Become the generic SDK runtime. Load the selected domain package, add a
  read-only exploration runner, replace topological snapshot loops with a
  dependency-aware parallel ready-queue scheduler, convert repair actions into
  scheduler effects, integrate residual-directed correction, route all candidate
  effects through the admissibility kernel, and remove remaining legacy
  prompt-template entry points in favor of typed prompt compiler calls.

**perspt-coding**
  New first-party domain package for coding work. Move coding-specific project
  initialization, repository detection, language adapters, compiler/LSP/test
  sensors, AST/symbol/import graph extraction, source-edit artifact bundle
  helpers, dependency policies, coding correction mappers, and coding benchmark
  fixtures out of the generic runtime. The existing Rust, Python, and
  JavaScript/TypeScript language plugins MAY inform the implementation, but the
  new adapters SHOULD implement SDK verifier-suite traits directly rather than
  preserving the old plugin ABI.

**perspt-policy**
  Implement the deterministic admissibility kernel, capability attenuation,
  command IR canonicalization, state witness validation, idempotency checks, and
  risk/approval evaluation.

**perspt-store**
  Add event-sourced tables for proposals, admissibility decisions, residuals,
  capabilities, graph revisions, node generations, replay observations, rollback
  events, exploration reports, parallel worker lifecycle events, leases, and
  residual certificates. The event stream SHALL be canonical. Existing PSP-7
  ``srbn_step_records`` and ``correction_attempts`` tables MAY be dropped,
  migrated forward, or regenerated as new projections; this PSP does not require
  old stored sessions to remain readable.

**perspt-sandbox**
  Add sandbox state witnesses, command manifests, verifier execution profiles,
  and crash-safe compensation hooks for partially applied effects.

**perspt-tui**
  Add plan/build/review mode indicators, graph revision UI, residual vector UI,
  capability approval prompts, undo/redo, and residual certificate rendering.

**perspt-dashboard**
  Extend the existing web monitoring interface with graph revision timeline,
  residual heatmap, parallel worker timeline, blocked-dependency view,
  capability/audit views, verifier independence routes, model-route telemetry,
  replay status, rollback history, and observed-versus-accepted trajectory
  views. The dashboard SHALL remain a read-only observer over the agent event
  stream.

**perspt-cli**
  Add flags and commands for modes, capabilities, graph revisions, residual
  certificates, replay verification, exploration, model routing, domain
  selection, concurrency, and benchmark mechanism checks.

**future domain packages**
  Research, website-builder, and task-specific packages SHOULD use
  ``perspt-sdk`` contracts directly. They MUST NOT fork the scheduler,
  admissibility kernel, residual model, replay ledger, or dashboard event model.

Core data structures:

.. code-block:: rust

   pub struct WorkGraphRevision {
       pub revision_id: String,
       pub sequence: u32,
       pub parent_revision_id: Option<String>,
       pub reason: GraphRevisionReason,
       pub nodes: Vec<WorkNode>,
       pub edges: Vec<WorkEdge>,
       pub validation: GraphValidationReport,
       pub evidence: Vec<ResidualEventRef>,
   }

   pub struct WorkNode {
       pub node_id: String,
       pub generation: u32,
       pub goal: String,
       pub node_class: NodeClass,
       pub owner_domains: Vec<DomainId>,
       pub owner_adapters: Vec<AdapterId>,
       pub output_targets: Vec<PathBuf>,
       pub context_requirements: Vec<ContextRequirement>,
       pub verifier_suite: VerifierSuiteRef,
       pub state: WorkNodeState,
   }

   pub struct VerifierRun {
       pub verifier_run_id: String,
       pub node_id: String,
       pub generation: u32,
       pub domain: DomainId,
       pub adapter: Option<AdapterId>,
       pub sensors: Vec<SensorOutcome>,
       pub residuals: Vec<ResidualEvent>,
       pub energy: EnergyComponents,
       pub degraded: bool,
   }

   pub struct EnergyModel {
       pub model_id: String,
       pub domain: DomainId,
       pub residual_weights: Vec<ResidualWeight>,
       pub rho_gate: f64,
       pub energy_tolerance: f64,
       pub correction_budget: u32,
       pub stability_claim: Option<StabilityClaim>,
   }

   pub struct ResidualWeight {
       pub class: ResidualClass,
       pub sensor: Option<SensorRef>,
       pub component: EnergyComponent,
       pub weight: f64,
       pub hard_threshold: Option<f64>,
   }

   pub struct StabilityClaim {
       pub claim_id: String,
       pub analysis_domain: String,
       pub alpha: Option<f64>,
       pub beta: Option<f64>,
       pub delta: Option<f64>,
       pub mu: Option<f64>,
       pub smoothness_l: Option<f64>,
       pub eta: Option<f64>,
       pub ultimate_floor: Option<f64>,
       pub evidence_refs: Vec<String>,
   }

   pub struct AcceptedTrajectoryRecord {
       pub node_id: String,
       pub generation: u32,
       pub baseline_energy: f64,
       pub current_accepted_energy: f64,
       pub gate_decisions: Vec<GateDecisionRef>,
       pub max_gate_decisions: Option<u32>,
   }

   pub struct AdmissibilityWitness {
       pub proposal_id: String,
       pub actor: ActorId,
       pub capability_id: String,
       pub authority_ok: bool,
       pub contract_ok: bool,
       pub effect_ok: bool,
       pub barrier_increment_ok: bool,
       pub risk_budget_ok: bool,
       pub decision: AdmissibilityDecision,
       pub recovery_class: Option<RecoveryClass>,
   }

   pub struct WorkflowPotential {
       pub workflow_id: String,
       pub accepted_energy: f64,
       pub rho_gate: f64,
       pub remaining_budget: u32,
       pub potential: f64,
   }

   pub struct ModelRoute {
       pub phase: AgentPhase,
       pub requested_tier: Option<ModelTier>,
       pub resolved_tier: ModelTier,
       pub model: String,
       pub fallback_model: Option<String>,
       pub budget: ModelBudget,
       pub reason: String,
   }

   pub struct ExplorationReport {
       pub report_id: String,
       pub model_route: Option<ModelRoute>,
       pub project_map: ProjectMap,
       pub domain_evidence: Vec<DomainActivationEvidence>,
       pub adapter_evidence: Vec<AdapterActivationEvidence>,
       pub graph_hints: Vec<GraphHint>,
       pub verifier_recommendations: Vec<VerifierSuiteRef>,
       pub input_witnesses: Vec<StateWitness>,
   }

   pub struct ParallelWorkItem {
       pub work_id: String,
       pub parent_activity_id: String,
       pub node_id: Option<String>,
       pub generation: Option<u32>,
       pub role: AgentRole,
       pub dependencies: Vec<WorkDependency>,
       pub required_leases: Vec<LeaseRequest>,
       pub capability_refs: Vec<String>,
       pub model_route: Option<ModelRoute>,
   }

   pub struct ExecutionLease {
       pub lease_id: String,
       pub holder_work_id: String,
       pub kind: LeaseKind,
       pub scope: LeaseScope,
       pub expires_at: Option<i64>,
   }

   pub enum SchedulerEffect {
       CommitNode { node_id: String, generation: u32 },
       RequeueNode { node_id: String, generation: u32, reason: String },
       ApplyGraphRevision { revision_id: String },
       SpawnWork { work_id: String },
       CancelWork { work_id: String, reason: String },
       RequestApproval { proposal_id: String },
       StopWithCertificate { certificate_id: String },
   }

Implementation phases are SDK-first: ``perspt-sdk`` is the foundation and
``perspt-coding`` is its first consumer, so every contract is exercised by a
real domain package and an SDK contract test as it lands rather than designed
ahead of any consumer. Later domain packages reuse the same contracts. Each
phase is independently shippable, is independently useful, and activates a named
conformance gate.

**Phase 0: Audit, SDK Skeleton, and Contract Tests**
  Add the ``perspt-sdk`` and ``perspt-coding`` crates with the domain-package
  trait surface, and wire ``perspt-sdk`` to ``srbn`` and ``srbn-serde`` for the
  stabilization loop and trace serialization in place of hand-rolled kernel
  logic. Add failing tests for static topo snapshot execution, repair-action
  requeue, capability denial, replay reconstruction, and SDK/domain boundary
  violations. These tests define the bug surface and the SDK boundary before
  the capabilities below are built.

**Phase 1: Quadratic Residual Energy and Measured Gate**
  In ``perspt-sdk`` add residual types with raw non-negative magnitudes,
  finite-score validation, and the canonical energy ``V = sum_e w_e r_e^2`` with
  component rollups as derived projections. Map existing verification results
  into residual events through the coding package. Add ``EnergyModel``,
  gate-decision, accepted-trajectory, residual-certificate, and
  finite-decision-bound records, comparing descent against the best accepted
  energy. Wire the kernel adapter and the prompt compiler to dominant residuals.
  This phase activates Gate A and Gate B.

**Phase 2: Parallel Mutable Scheduler**
  Replace the topological snapshot loops with a dependency-aware ready-queue
  scheduler in the SDK runtime. Add worker pools, leases, cancellation, and join
  events. Convert repair actions into scheduler effects and graph revisions.
  Ensure inserted or reset nodes execute. Parallelism is complete only when
  noncommuting durable effects serialize on the read/write footprint and
  commuting read-only/verifier work can proceed concurrently with replayable
  spawn/join/cancel events. This phase activates Gate C.

**Phase 3: Capability Kernel**
  Add capability records, command IR, admissibility decisions, attenuation
  checks, and state witnesses in ``perspt-policy``, with coding capability
  templates supplied by ``perspt-coding``. Route all tool effects through the
  kernel. This phase activates Gate E.

**Phase 4: Replay Ledger and Durable Obligations**
  Add event-sourced persistence, the kernel-refusal rule enforced at the SDK
  effect boundary, the replay verifier, and the six durable-execution
  obligations. Convert existing step, correction, energy, and artifact tables
  into the new event stream or replace them with projections over it. This phase
  activates Gate F.

**Phase 5: Spectral Diagnostic and Verifier Independence**
  Compute the spectral energy-slope constant ``mu`` from the verification graph
  off the critical path and expose its sensitivity to candidate verifier edges.
  Measure pairwise validator miss correlation from the ledger and weight
  residuals by measured independence, surfacing ``rho_eff``. This phase
  activates the required portion of Gate G.

**Phase 6: Coding Verifier Suites**
  In ``perspt-coding`` implement the Rust verifier suite first, then Python and
  JavaScript/TypeScript, with AST/symbol/import graph extraction and
  correction-direction mappers through the SDK verifier-suite traits. PSP
  completion requires the first-party Rust, Python, and JavaScript/TypeScript
  suites to satisfy Gate D, even if Rust is implemented first.

**Phase 7: Exploration and Model Routing**
  Add read-only exploration reports, ``explorer_model`` config,
  ``--explorer-model``, ``--explorer-tier``, ``--exploration-only``, and
  exploration budgets. Default Explorer routing to the Speculator tier unless
  explicitly configured. Exploration output must be structured evidence with
  input witnesses, not free-form summary text that bypasses residual scoring.

**Phase 8: Calibrated Risk Budgets**
  Add conformal calibration of validator acceptance thresholds from the ledger,
  the delayed unsafe label sourced from undo/redo and regression residuals, and
  the calibration drift monitor with graceful back-off. This phase activates
  Gate I and is required only when autonomous commitment without per-effect
  approval is enabled.

**Phase 9: UX and Web Observability**
  Expose graph revisions, residuals, capabilities, active workers, blocked
  dependencies, model routes, observed/accepted trajectory, the backlog gauge,
  and residual certificates in TUI, CLI, and dashboard. This phase activates
  Gate H.

**Phase 10: CLI Domain Routing and Second-Domain Readiness**
  Make domain selection explicit in the CLI and confirm the SDK contracts admit
  a second domain package without forking the scheduler, admissibility kernel,
  residual model, replay ledger, or dashboard event model. A research or
  website-builder package skeleton SHOULD compile against the SDK as the
  readiness check for later domains.

**Phase 11: Mechanism Checks and Benchmarks**
  Ship deterministic mechanism checks, SDK contract tests, and coding language
  fixture benchmarks. Publish results with failures preserved.

Conformance Acceptance Criteria
-------------------------------

The PSP implementation is accepted only when the conformance gates above are
backed by tests and observable ledger evidence. In particular:

* every supported domain package declares a residual schema and energy model;
* every verifier output is converted into typed residual evidence or an explicit
  degraded-sensor residual;
* every candidate has a recorded energy score, gate decision, correction route,
  and accepted/observed trajectory classification;
* every residual certificate contains final residuals, energy, budgets, verifier
  routes, rejected attempts, correction directions, and ledger head;
* every effect has an admissibility witness and capability consumption record;
* every graph revision validates acyclicity and records the evidence that caused
  it;
* every replay reads recorded observations rather than re-running nondeterminism;
* every dashboard projection is derived from ledger events, not side-channel
  runtime state;
* every analytic stability display is backed by a ``StabilityClaim`` or marked
  ``NotClaimed``.

Requirement-to-code trace:

.. csv-table:: PSP 8 Requirement Trace
   :header: "Requirement", "Current surface", "Required change"
   :widths: 30, 35, 35

   "SDK/domain split", "Domain-neutral SRBN control plane is mixed with coding-agent and language-plugin concerns", "Add ``perspt-sdk`` and ``perspt-coding``; make plugins/adapters consume SDK contracts"
   "Mutable work graph", "``run_orchestration`` and ``run_resumed_inner`` snapshot ``Topo`` indices", "Introduce ready-queue scheduler and graph revisions"
   "Cheap repository exploration", "Planning and speculator lookahead exist, but no read-only exploration phase or exploration model route", "Add Explorer/Scout phase using ``explorer_model`` or Speculator-tier fallback with structured exploration reports"
   "Parallel dependent work", "Node execution and repair flow are effectively serialized around one topo walk", "Add dependency-aware worker pool, leases, cancellation, join events, and concurrency limits"
   "Repair actions create executable work", "``apply_repair_action`` returns ``bool`` and ``execute_node`` returns ``Escalated``", "Return scheduler effects and requeue/execute new generations"
   "Residual-directed correction", "Verification results and diagnostics feed prompt text", "Persist typed residual events and correction directions"
   "Coding verifier suites", "Language plugins expose verifier commands and correction contracts", "Move language adapters into ``perspt-coding`` and add AST, symbol, import graph, targeted tests, logical validators, tree-search repair candidates"
   "Capability kernel", "Tools and commands pass through sanitization/policy checks", "Add proposal/effect split, capabilities, state witnesses, risk budgets, and command IR"
   "Deterministic replay", "Ledger stores sessions, energy, steps, corrections, bundles, rewrites", "Add event-sourced replay log covering every proposal, observation, decision, and effect"
   "SRBN kernel semantics", "Energy/convergence implemented directly in orchestrator", "Introduce shared kernel adapter with finite scores, descent gate, statuses, and traces"
   "Useful coding-agent UX", "TUI/dashboard show logs, DAG, energy, decisions", "Add plan/build/review modes, residual vectors, graph revisions, capability prompts, undo/redo"

=========
Rationale
=========

**Why SDK-first rather than plugin-first?** The SRBN papers describe a control
discipline, not a language-extension mechanism. Mutable scheduling, residual
scoring, capability confinement, replay, model routing, and dashboard
projections are useful for coding, research, website building, and other
long-running task domains. If those concepts live behind language plugins, every
non-coding domain either misuses the plugin layer or reimplements the control
plane. SDK-first keeps the stability contract central and lets each domain
package define SDK-native adapters for its own sensors, artifacts, and
correction routes.

**Why a mutable graph instead of abandoning DAGs?** The SRBN papers use a DAG
because each accepted graph revision needs an acyclic dependency topology. The
problem is not acyclicity; the problem is pretending the initial graph is final.
A revisioned acyclic work graph preserves the sheaf/topology discipline while
allowing real coding discoveries to change scope.

**Why residuals instead of raw logs?** Logs are evidence for humans. Residuals
are evidence for control. SRBN needs measurable residuals with scores,
components, sensors, and correction directions so the controller can target the
dominant failure instead of issuing a generic retry.

**Why a cheap exploration phase?** Existing repositories usually require broad
orientation before the right node boundaries, verifiers, and context slices are
known. That orientation is mostly read-only summarization and indexing, so it
should be able to use a lower-cost model such as the Speculator tier without
weakening acceptance gates, which still depend on deterministic barriers and
residual descent.

**Why parallelism with leases?** Paper III only requires serialization for
non-commuting durable commits. Repository search, LSP queries, AST extraction,
independent verifier runs, and unrelated node attempts can safely overlap if
their dependencies, capabilities, and state witnesses are explicit. Leases make
the boundary auditable instead of relying on informal scheduling discipline.

**Why capabilities instead of more command allowlists?** Paper III's confinement
results require authority to be an explicit attenuable value. A command allowlist
is useful, but it does not by itself answer who proposed the effect, which node
needed it, which scope it touches, whether the state changed since approval, or
whether the actor delegated authority safely.

**Why coding language adapters?** Useful coding agents succeed or fail on
repository-native feedback. Rust, Python, and TypeScript have different module
systems, package managers, test discovery, and correction patterns. Hardcoding
those in the orchestrator weakens reliability, while making them the global
plugin architecture weakens reuse. They belong in ``perspt-coding`` as SDK
verifier-suite adapters.

**Why keep coding-agent ergonomics in scope?** The SRBN system still needs
usable workflows: plan mode, project instructions, search/read/edit tools,
approval, undo, and clear status. These are not theoretical luxuries; they are
the daily ergonomics that make users trust a coding agent. Perspt's goal is to
make those workflows reliable through accepted-state gates, residual-directed
correction, capability confinement, and replayable history.

**Alternatives considered:**

1. *Keep the static DAG and only improve verifiers.* Rejected: verifier evidence
   often proves the graph itself is wrong.
2. *Keep plugin-first architecture and add more plugin traits.* Rejected:
   language plugins are suitable for compiler/LSP/test integration, but not for
   research evidence, website screenshots, deployment checks, replay schemas, or
   capability confinement. A growing plugin trait would become an accidental SDK
   with weaker boundaries.
3. *Use Architect for all repository exploration.* Rejected: broad read-only
   orientation should not consume the most expensive tier by default, and
   acceptance should not depend on the exploration model's authority.
4. *Run every ready node in parallel.* Rejected: "ready" by dependency order is
   not enough. Nodes can still conflict through files, manifests, public
   interfaces, toolchains, migrations, or state witnesses.
5. *Use an unconstrained dynamic task list.* Rejected: loses the SRBN topology,
   ownership, and sheaf validation contracts.
6. *Let the LLM directly choose shell commands.* Rejected: too much authority is
   hidden in strings, and replay/admissibility become weak.
7. *Rely on same-model self-critique as verifier.* Rejected: it is a useful
   fallback but not an independent barrier.
8. *Hide residual details from users.* Rejected: Perspt's differentiator is
   inspectable stability, not opaque autonomy.

==============================
Breaking Changes and Migration
==============================

This PSP intentionally permits breaking changes. The SDK/domain split is a
clean architecture boundary, not a compatibility layer over the current
orchestrator and language-plugin model.

Required breaking changes:

* ``perspt-sdk`` becomes the canonical public agent API for SRBN state,
  residuals, graph scheduling, capabilities, replay, and domain packages.
* ``perspt-coding`` becomes the owner of coding-specific behavior. Rust, Python,
  and JavaScript/TypeScript integrations SHALL move out of the generic runtime.
* The existing language-plugin ABI MAY be removed. New coding adapters SHALL
  implement SDK verifier-suite traits directly.
* The old topological scheduler MAY be removed once the mutable ready-queue
  scheduler is available behind tests.
* The old session/event schema does not need to remain readable. A one-way
  migration command MAY be provided, but replay correctness applies only to the
  new event-sourced ledger.
* Command policy configuration MAY be replaced by capability policies and
  command IR rules.
* Direct shell execution behavior SHALL become stricter and SHALL route through
  explicit ``RunShell`` proposals.
* Legacy prompt-template entry points MAY be deleted once the typed prompt
  compiler owns all prompt families.
* CLI defaults MAY change to expose explicit domain selection, concurrency, and
  capability policy.
* Dashboard and TUI views MAY be rebuilt on top of new ledger projections rather
  than preserving old event shapes.

Migration guidance:

* Preserve concepts from PSP-5 and PSP-7 when they remain valid: artifact
  bundles, typed parse states, budget envelopes, energy components, correction
  telemetry, and dashboard observability.
* Do not preserve old module boundaries merely to avoid churn. Move behavior to
  the crate that owns the new responsibility.
* Treat old tables, events, plugin methods, and command strings as source
  material for migration tests, not as stable APIs.
* Provide clear release notes and config validation errors for removed fields,
  but prefer a correct SDK architecture over silent compatibility behavior.

Users should see stricter denials and more explicit residual certificates. That
is intentional. False success is worse than visible non-convergence.

========================
Reference Implementation
========================

Initial implementation should be narrow and test-driven, SDK-first, with
``perspt-coding`` as the first consumer that exercises each contract as it
lands:

0. Add the ``perspt-sdk`` and ``perspt-coding`` crates with the domain-package
   trait surface, and wire ``perspt-sdk`` to ``srbn`` and ``srbn-serde``.
1. Add ``ResidualEvent`` with raw non-negative magnitudes and map existing
   ``VerificationResult`` into residuals through the coding package.
2. Implement the canonical energy ``V = sum_e w_e r_e^2`` with component
   rollups as derived projections, the measured gate against the best accepted
   energy, gate decisions, accepted trajectory records, residual certificates,
   and the finite-decision bound.
3. Add a failing unit/integration test showing that a node inserted by
   ``NodeSplit`` or ``InterfaceInsertion`` is not executed by the current topo
   snapshot loop.
4. Add a ready-queue scheduler behind an experimental flag:
   ``--scheduler mutable``.
5. Convert ``RewriteAction`` handling to produce ``SchedulerEffect``.
6. Add worker-pool and lease tests for two independent verifier tasks, one
   dependent task, and two conflicting manifest mutations, including capability
   and budget footprints.
7. Add capability records for read/search/write/run-verifier/run-shell and route
   ``AgentTools`` through admissibility checks.
8. Add event rows for proposal, admissibility, residual, graph revision,
   exploration report, parallel task lifecycle, lease lifecycle, and accepted
   candidate, with the kernel-refusal rule for unrecorded observations.
9. Compute the spectral constant ``mu`` for a synthetic verification graph and
   measure validator miss correlation from the ledger.
10. Implement Rust unresolved-import and missing-module correction directions.
11. Add an exploration model-routing test showing ``--explorer-model`` wins over
    ``speculator_model`` and that absent overrides route Explorer to Speculator.
12. Add a read-only exploration report for Rust workspaces: package roots,
    ``cargo metadata`` summary, module/test hints, and adapter activation
    evidence.
13. Add dashboard panels for residuals, graph revisions, active workers, blocked
    dependencies, the backlog gauge, and model routes.
14. Make domain selection explicit in the CLI and confirm a second domain
    package compiles against the SDK contracts without forking the scheduler,
    kernel, residual model, ledger, or dashboard event model.
15. Add mechanism checks as CI tests, then remove the experimental flag after
    parity with current project mode is reached.

Testing strategy:

* unit tests for residual scoring and non-negative finite validation;
* unit tests for ``V = sum_e w_e r_e^2`` with deterministic synthetic
  residuals;
* unit tests for hard-pass, descent-pass, non-descending rejection, declared
  floor, and exhausted-certificate gate decisions;
* unit tests for the finite-decision bound
  ``floor(V_0 / rho_gate) + B + 1``;
* unit tests for ``srbn`` adapter terminal statuses and ``srbn-serde`` trace
  serialization round trips;
* unit tests for stability-claim calculations: ``V_infty`` and discrete
  step-size precondition checks;
* SDK contract tests for domain package registration, context packages,
  verifier suites, residual mapping, and dashboard projections;
* unit tests for exploration model routing and budget enforcement;
* unit tests proving read-only exploration cannot acquire mutation capabilities;
* unit tests for graph revision acyclicity and node generation lineage;
* scheduler tests for inserted-node execution, requeued descendants, and budget
  exhaustion;
* scheduler tests for parallel ready work, dependent wait states, lease
  conflicts, task cancellation, and accepted-commit serialization;
* coding-adapter tests for Rust/Python/TypeScript verifier-suite residuals;
* command IR canonicalization tests;
* admissibility-witness tests covering authority, contract, effect,
  barrier-increment, and risk-budget clauses;
* capability attenuation and denial tests;
* replay round-trip tests;
* TUI/dashboard snapshot tests for residual and graph revision rendering;
* end-to-end fixture tasks for each first-party coding language adapter.

============
Open Issues
============

* **Graph merge semantics:** Node splitting is straightforward; merging sibling
  nodes after discovering a shared root cause needs careful ownership rules.
* **Risk budgets:** Paper III supports calibrated budgets, but Perspt may start
  with deterministic risk classes and add statistical calibration later.
* **External documentation access:** Researcher agents need web/documentation
  capabilities, but network access should remain explicit and scoped.
* **Domain package ABI:** The first implementation can use in-process Rust
  packages, but the SDK should preserve enough isolation boundaries to support
  future WASM or process-isolated packages.
* **Explorer tier shape:** Explorer can be a first-class ``ModelTier`` or a
  phase routed to Speculator. The first implementation should probably avoid a
  new tier until routing pressure proves it is needed.
* **Parallel conflict granularity:** File-level leases are simple but may be too
  conservative. Symbol/interface-level leases are more precise but require
  stronger coding-adapter evidence.
* **Event schema size:** Full replay logs can grow quickly. Perspt needs
  compaction that preserves accepted trajectory and replay-critical observations.
* **Learned barriers:** This PSP focuses on deterministic and tool-based
  barriers. Learned verifier models can be added later if their independence,
  calibration, and evidence routes are recorded.
* **Project instruction import:** Perspt should read existing project
  instructions when useful, but it must hash and provenance-track any imported
  instructions.

==========
References
==========

The paper references point to local PDF builds until the manuscripts have stable
publisher metadata. Future revisions SHOULD replace these entries with DOI,
publisher, or archival metadata when available.

* Rathore, Vikrant. *Stability is All You Need I*. Forthcoming. Reviewed PDF:
  ``../../insan.ai/sayn/paper/dist/stability_is_all_you_need_I.pdf``.
  Relevant concepts: SRBN foundations, sheaf consistency, Lyapunov energy,
  accepted trajectory, Merkleized state, discrete stability, and validation
  protocol.
* Rathore, Vikrant. *Stability is All You Need II*. Forthcoming. Reviewed
  PDF: ``../../insan.ai/sayn/paper/dist/stability_is_all_you_need_II.pdf``.
  Relevant concepts: harness contract, residual vectors, observable descent
  gate, provider portability, verifier independence, and residual-certified
  termination.
* Rathore, Vikrant. *Stability is All You Need III*. Forthcoming. Reviewed
  PDF: ``../../insan.ai/sayn/paper/dist/stability_is_all_you_need_III.pdf``.
  Relevant concepts: platform contract, capability-constrained control,
  admissibility kernel, recovery termination, replay determinism, coordination
  minimality, and platform-level Foster-Lyapunov stability.
* ``srbn`` crate, reviewed local version ``0.1.1``. Published package:
  `crates.io/crates/srbn <https://crates.io/crates/srbn>`__. Source repository:
  `codeberg.org/insanai/srbn-rust <https://codeberg.org/insanai/srbn-rust>`__.
  Reviewed source: ``../../insan.ai/sayn/projects/rust/srbn``. Relevant
  concepts: minimal SRBN kernel, ``run``/``stabilize`` loops, finite residual
  scores, barrier results, attempt traces, and terminal statuses.
* ``srbn-serde`` crate, reviewed local version ``0.1.1``. Published package:
  `crates.io/crates/srbn-serde <https://crates.io/crates/srbn-serde>`__. Source
  repository:
  `codeberg.org/insanai/srbn-rust <https://codeberg.org/insanai/srbn-rust>`__.
  Reviewed source: ``../../insan.ai/sayn/projects/rust/srbn-serde``. Relevant
  concepts: serde and serde_json helpers for SRBN trace types.

=========
Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.
